.. _conf-reference:

``asv.conf.json`` reference
===========================

The ``asv.conf.json`` file contains information about a particular
benchmarking project.  The following describes each of the keys in
this file and their expected values.

``project``
-----------
The name of the project being benchmarked.

``project_url``
---------------
The URL to the homepage of the project.  This can point to anywhere,
really, as it's only used for the link at the top of the benchmark
results page back to your project.

``repo``
--------
The URL to the repository for the project.

Currently, only ``git`` repositories are supported, so this must be a
URL that ``git`` knows how to clone from, for example:

   - git@github.com:spacetelescope/asv.git

   - https://github.com/spacetelescope/asv.git

The repository may be readonly.

``show_commit_url``
-------------------
The base URL to show information about a particular commit.  The
commit hash will be added to the end of this URL and then opened in a
new tab when a data point is clicked on in the web interface.

For example, if using Github to host your repository, the
``show_commit_url`` should be:

    http://github.com/owner/project/commit/

``pythons``
-----------
The versions of Python to run the benchmarks in.  If not provided, it
will to default to the version of Python that the ``asv`` command
(master) is being run under.

If provided, it should be a list of strings.  The string will be
appended to ``python`` and that string will be searched on the current
``PATH`` to find the appropriate Python binary.  For example::

   "pythons": ["2.7", "3.3"]

will look for the binaries ``python2.7`` and ``python3.3`` on the path.

.. note::

    **airspeed velocity** does not handle downloading and installing
    different versions of Python for you.  They must already be
    installed and on the path.  Depending on your platform, you can
    install multiple versions of Python using your package manager or
    using `pyenv <https://github.com/yyuu/pyenv>`_.

``matrix``
----------
Defines a matrix of third-party dependencies to run the benchmarks with.

If provided, it must be a dictionary, where the keys are the names of
dependencies and the values are lists of versions (as strings) of that
dependency.  If the list is empty, use the "latest" version of that
dependency available on PyPI.

For example, the following will test with two different versions of
Numpy, and the latest version of Cython::

    "matrix": {
        "numpy": ["1.7", "1.8"],
        "Cython": []
    }

The matrix dependencies are installed *before* any dependencies that
the project being benchmarked may specify in its ``setup.py`` file.

.. note::

    At present, this functionality is rather limited, as it only
    supports dependencies that are installable from PyPI using
    ``pip``, and there is no functionality for limiting the matrix to
    specific combinations.

``benchmark_dir``
-----------------
The directory, relative to the current directory, that benchmarks are
stored in.  Should rarely need to be overridden.  If not provided,
defaults to ``"benchmarks"``.

``env_dir``
-----------
The directory, relative to the current directory, to cache the Python
environments in.  If not provided, defaults to ``"env"``.

``results_dir``
---------------
The directory, relative to the current directory, that the raw results
are stored in.  If not provided, defaults to ``"results"``.

``html_dir``
------------
The directory, relative to the current directory, to save the website
content in.  If not provided, defaults to ``"html"``.

``hash_length``
---------------
The number of characters to retain in the commit hashes when displayed
in the web interface.  The default value of 8 should be more than
enough for most projects, but projects with extremely large history
may need to increase this value.  This does not affect the storage of
results, where the full commit hash is always retained.
